Rework release team lead handbook & init release team lead progress issue (#2100)
kubernetes/sig-release: .github/ISSUE_TEMPLATE/release-team-lead-progress.md

- [ ] Release directory named `release-1.XX` added to [k/sig-release/releases](https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/tree/master/releases)
- [ ] Started planning the release schedule by opening a thread in `#sig-release`
- [ ] Release Lead Shadows are confirmed
- [ ] Team leads notified that all release team members read the [release team onboarding document](https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/blob/master/release-team/release-team-onboarding.md)
- [ ] Update slack channel descriptions for the `#sig-release` channel and all `#release-xxx` channels

**Release Lead Onboarding:**
- [ ] Release Team Lead has agreed to abide by the guidelines set forth in the
  [Security Release Process](https://git.k8s.io/security/security-release-process.md), specifically the embargo on CVE communications.
  This must be done as an issue comment by the incoming Release Team Lead.
- [ ] Updated GitHub teams [(`kubernetes/org`)](https://git.k8s.io/org/config/kubernetes/sig-release/teams.yaml)
  - `milestone-maintainers`
  - `release-team`
  - `release-team-leads`
  - `sig-release`
- [ ] Updated `kubernetes/sig-release` `OWNERS`
  - Release Team Lead and Shadows

>     - Add an `approvers` entry in `releases/release-x.y/OWNERS`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Add an `approvers` entry in `releases/release-1.XX/OWNERS`
```

- [ ] Meet your Shadows and create a communication channel with them. Establish expectations and share out work - delegate!
- [ ] Request review of this document by the Release Team Lead shadow(s). The shadow(s) should also take all actions in this document around joining groups and requesting access permissions.
- [ ] Update the SIG Release groups in the `k/k8s.io/groups/sig-release/groups.yaml` with the following:
  - [ ] Add Lead and Lead shadows to members of `k8s-infra-release-viewers`
  - [ ] Add EA, Lead, Lead shadows, comms lead, comms shadows to members of `release-comms`
  - [ ] Add EA, Lead and Lead shadows to members of `release-managers`
  - [ ] Add EA, Lead and Lead shadows to managers of `release-team`
  - [ ] Add Role Leads and Role shadows to members of `release-team`
  - [ ] Add Role shadows and Lead shadows to members of `release-team-shadows`
  - [ ] Add EA to manager of release-team-shadows, if EA is owner of `release-team-shadows` already then add Lead to manager of `release-team-shadows`
  - [ ] Add Bug Triage Lead and shadows to `k8s-infra-rbac-triageparty-release`

> - [ ] Ensured that there is a branch manager available for cutting x.y.0-alpha.1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] Ensured that there is a branch manager available for cutting 1.XX.0-alpha.1
```

- Assist the Enhancements Lead in collecting planned work from SIGs
- [ ] Discussed and scheduled a weekly Release Team meetings on a day that is most acceptable to the team. Invite the `kubernetes-sig-release` group.
- [ ] Poll Release Team membership and schedule a weekly alternate meeting to better enable more attendance outside of the Americas.
- [ ] Major release cycle events have been added to the Kubernetes Release Calendar with one week in advance reminders set. (defer to the [handbook for more information](https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/tree/master/release-team/role-handbooks/release-team-lead#working-with-the-release-team-calendar))

> - [ ] Checked in with ci-signal and branch managers if x.y.0-alpha.2 is ok to be released and [master-blocking](https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-release-master-blocking) tests are all green

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] Checked in with ci-signal and branch managers if 1.XX.0-alpha.2 is ok to be released and [master-blocking](https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-release-master-blocking) tests are all green
```

**A week before Enhancements Freeze:**
- [ ] Remind the community about Enhancements Freeze reminder send out. Example email: [1.26](https://groups.google.com/a/kubernetes.io/g/dev/c/pJZC2cnkeJ8); It may also be useful to send a short version to the `#sig-release` and `#chairs-and-techleads` Slack channels referencing to the k-dev email.

### 3. Enhancements freeze up to Release Halfway Point (~Week 5 - 7)

**General Tasks:**
- Bring exceptions to the #sig-release Slack channel and to Release Team meetings, and make sure SIG representatives for the exception(s) know to attend and discuss if necessary.
- Begin casual observation of issues, CI signal, test flakes, and critical PRs
- [ ] Release Team Retro is scheduled shortly after the "Release Halfway Point" and a host is selected

**Release Cut Alpha 3:**
- [ ] Checked in with ci-signal and branch managers if 1.XX.0-alpha.3 is ok to be released and [master-blocking](https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-release-master-blocking) tests are all green

> - [ ] Checked in with Release Notes team on release notes progress after the release notes for 1.XX.0-alpha.3 is generated

Reviewer 2: I see many `release notes` words in this sentence. I think the last one should be changed to `tag`. As Release Notes Team we should generate the release notes after the tag/release for `1.XX.0-alpha.3` is generated/published.

```suggestion
- [ ] Checked in with Release Notes team on release notes progress after the tag for 1.XX.0-alpha.3 is generated
```

**Release Cut Alpha 4:**
- [ ] Checked in with ci-signal and branch managers if 1.XX.0-alpha.4 is ok to be released and [master-blocking](https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-release-master-blocking) tests are all green

> - [ ] Checked in with Release Notes team on release notes progress after the release notes for 1.XX.0-alpha.4 is generated

Reviewer 2: Same comment as the previous one.

```suggestion
- [ ] Checked in with Release Notes team on release notes progress after the tag for 1.XX.0-alpha.4 is generated
```

- The following final actions **must occur in order**, with successful completion of each being the entry criteria to the next.
  - Release day morning:
    - [ ] Go / No-Go: should generally be clear a day or three ahead of release, but the day's burndown provides a final opportunity for the team to affirm things are ready.
    - [ ] Release Notes Lead PRs final draft release notes to sig-release, with Release Team Lead approving merge.
    - [ ] Branch Manager does mock release build.
    - [ ] Branch Manager does mock publication. Validates with Release Team lead and broader team the mock announcement email content.
    - [ ] Branch Manager does nomock release build.
  - Starting when ready:
    - [ ] Communications Lead begins staging blog post.
    - [ ] Branch Manager Lead does nomock publication.
    - [ ] Branch Manager coordinates the building and publishing of rpm/deb packages with Google Build Admins.
    - [ ] Build Admins affirms build is complete.

>     - [ ] Docs Lead publishes release docs to website.

Reviewer 3: I'd mention that this is a _manual merge_ due to the freeze.

Reviewer 3: OK to leave as-is and fix in a later PR, though.

Author: We could link to the docs handbook for more details maybe? https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/blob/master/release-team/role-handbooks/docs/Release-Timeline.md#release-week-week-12

Author: added the link ✅

    - [ ] Branch Manager does release-notify.
  - [ ] Approximately 5pm Pacific: all work is complete and the release team
    lead announces release to [k-dev](https://groups.google.com/a/kubernetes.io/g/dev), [SIG Leads](https://groups.google.com/a/kubernetes.io/g/leads), and discuss.k8s.io.
- [ ] After the release, it’s time to lift code freeze. The bot will need to be updated.
  - [Thaw k/k](https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/blob/de9e0a9821c4f73b83b4382df7a7dc837f91e18f/releases/release_phases.md#thaw), 
    master branch is then opened for new pull requests.
- [ ] The Docs lead thaws k/website
- [ ] Use all of the appropriate communications channels to announce the lifting of Code Freeze and thawing of 

>   k/website, this can part of the release announcement.

Reviewer 3: Does anyone check that the website, release blog, download page etc look right? We could have a checkbox for that.

Author: agree, that is a good idea.

#### With Code Freeze
- As needed, assist the Bug Triage Lead and Enhancements Lead removing PRs and enhancements from the milestone that aren't merged in time `/milestone clear`

#### After Code Freeze
- Wait for exception requests and bring them to `#sig-release`
- [ ] Verified that the [`release-1.XX` branch](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/branches) has been automatically created at the start of Test Freeze
- [ ] Verified that the Branch Manager created the CI board on [Testgrid](https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-release) for the release cycle (1.XX-blocking & 1.XX-informing)
- [ ] Published the "Removals, Deprecations, and Major Changes blog"

### 6. Test Freeze up to Release Day (~Week 14)
- [ ] Verified together with the release-docs team that all KEPs with required documentation are ready for review
- [ ] Completed release theme (slogan, logo and explanation text) and add it to the [release cycle documentation in k/sig-release/releases/release-1.XX](https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/tree/master/releases)
- [ ] Decided with the Release team if burndown meetings are necessary or updates are done via Slack thread on Tuesdays and Thursdays

> - [ ] Discussed Release Lead succession with the EA and sig-release leads
> - [ ] Remind team lead to find successors for the upcoming cycle and discuss candidates with the EA

Reviewer 4: non-blocking nit: I would start these conversations a week earlier
```suggestion
- [ ] Discussed Release Lead succession with the EA and sig-release leads
- [ ] Remind team lead to find successors for the upcoming cycle and discuss candidates with the EA
```

Author: 👍 i will update it tomorrow

Author: The succession is mentioned before and this section here is another reminder. So I think it is fine like this.

- [ ] Help fill any open positions for the next release milestone
- [ ] Work with the incoming Release Team Lead to establish incoming Release Team.

**Release Lead Offboarding tasks**:
- [ ] Remove from GitHub teams [(`kubernetes/org`)](https://git.k8s.io/org/config/kubernetes/sig-release/teams.yaml)
  - `milestone-maintainers`
  - `release-team`
  - `release-team-leads`
- [ ] Remove from Google Groups/GCP IAM membership [(`kubernetes/k8s.io`)](https://git.k8s.io/k8s.io/groups/groups.yaml)
  - `k8s-infra-release-viewers@`
  - `release-managers@`
- [ ] Manually remove from the following Google Groups:
  - [kubernetes-release-team](https://groups.google.com/a/kubernetes.io/g/release-team) (Add as Manager)
  - [kubernetes-sig-leads](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/kubernetes-sig-leads) (Add as Member)
- [ ] Remove from `release-team-leads` Slack Group [(`kubernetes/community`)](https://git.k8s.io/community/communication/slack-config/sig-release/usergroups.yaml)
  - Remove slack ID(s) from [`users.yaml`](https://git.k8s.io/community/communication/slack-config/users.yaml), if no longer in a group

>   - Remove username(s) from [`usergroups.yaml`](https://git.k8s.io/community/communication/slack-config/sig-release/usergroups.yaml)

Author: do you think this needed? The next release team lead updates the team anyways

Author: we can update this in a future pr too.. lets get this version merged 😅

title: '[1.XX] Release Team Lead Cycle Progress'
labels: sig/release, area/release-eng, area/release-team
---

<!--
This template is used for tracking tasks that the Release Team Lead and Lead Shadows needs to do in a release cycle.

The issue should be kept open for the entirety of the release cycle, until all tasks are completed.
-->

* Release Team Leads
  * Release Lead: (at)USERNAME
  * Release Lead Shadow: (at)USERNAME
  * Release Lead Shadow: (at)USERNAME
  * Release Lead Shadow: (at)USERNAME
  * Release Lead Shadow: (at)USERNAME
* Release Cycle: `Kubernetes 1.XX`
* [Release Timeline](https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/tree/master/releases/release-1.XX) <!-- DON'T FORGET TO UPDATE THE LINK -->

Additional information can be found in the [release team lead handbook](https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/tree/master/release-team/role-handbooks/release-team-lead). If tasks are not needed to be done or additional tasks are required, make sure to update the issue template!

## Release Lead tasks

### 1. Before the start of the Release Cycle (Week 0)

- [ ] Captured feedback from previous release cycle retro and planned to incorporate it into the release cycle

> - [ ] Release folder added to [k/sig-release/releases](https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/tree/master/releases)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] Release directory named `release-1.XX` added to [k/sig-release/releases](https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/tree/master/releases)
```

**Create Release Team Documents:**
- [ ] Meeting Notes document created
  - Access: public comment access, edit access [kubernetes-release-team](https://groups.google.com/a/kubernetes.io/g/release-team)
  - Bit.ly: `bit.ly/k8s1XX-releasemtg`
  - Example: [1.26](https://bit.ly/k8s126-releasemtg)
- [ ] Retro document created
  - Access: public comment access, edit rights shared with [kubernetes-release-team](https://groups.google.com/a/kubernetes.io/g/release-team)
  - Bit.ly: `bit.ly/k8s1XX-retro`
  - Example: [1.26](https://bit.ly/k8s126-retro)
- [ ] Release Team contact sheet created
  - Access: **restricted access** edit rights shared with [kubernetes-release-team](https://groups.google.com/a/kubernetes.io/g/release-team)
  - Bit.ly: `bit.ly/k8s1XX-contacts`
- [ ] Lead rotation sheet created
  - Access: : **restricted access**, edit rights shared with release team lead shadows individually

**One week before the start of the release cycle:**
- [ ] "Release Sneak Peak" email to introduce yourself, lead shadows, role leads, and branch manager has been send out

>   - Send the email to [k-dev](https://groups.google.com/a/kubernetes.io/g/dev), [SIG Leads](https://groups.google.com/a/kubernetes.io/g/leads), [SIG Release](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/kubernetes-sig-release), [Release Team](https://groups.google.com/a/kubernetes.io/g/release-team)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Send the email to [k-dev](https://groups.google.com/a/kubernetes.io/g/dev), [SIG Leads](https://groups.google.com/a/kubernetes.io/g/leads), [SIG Release](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/kubernetes-sig-release), and [Release Team](https://groups.google.com/a/kubernetes.io/g/release-team)
```

>   - Example: [1.24 sneak peek](https://groups.google.com/a/kubernetes.io/g/release-team/c/hePU9eaoYEw), [1.25 sneak peek](https://groups.google.com/a/kubernetes.io/g/release-team/c/jwqlcrctFO0)

Reviewer: These examples are on the release-team mailing list, so they don't work if you're not already on the team. Change to the k-dev versions?

Author: yes, good catch!

<!-- - [ ] Assist the Enhancements Lead in collecting planned work from SIGs -->
- [ ] Discussed and scheduled a weekly Release Team meetings on a day that is most acceptable to the team. Invite the `kubernetes-sig-release` group.
- [ ] Poll Release Team membership and schedule a weekly alternate meeting to better enable more attendance outside of the Americas.
- [ ] Major release cycle events have been added to the Kubernetes Release Calendar with one week in advance reminders set. (defer to the [handbook for more information](https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/tree/master/release-team/role-handbooks/release-team-lead#working-with-the-release-team-calendar))
<!-- - [ ] Prepare for x.y.0-alpha.2 release and that [master-blocking](https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-release-master-blocking) tests are all green -->
<!-- - [ ] Identified any other dependent ecosystem projects that need release coordination -->
- [ ] Checked in with ci-signal and branch managers if x.y.0-alpha.2 is ok to be released and [master-blocking](https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-release-master-blocking) tests are all green

**A week before Enhancements Freeze:**

> - [ ] Remind the community about Enhancements Freeze reminder send out. Example email: [1.26](https://groups.google.com/a/kubernetes.io/g/dev/c/pJZC2cnkeJ8); It may also be useful to send a short version to the `#sig-release` and `#chairs-and-techleads` slack channels referencing to the k-dev email.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] Remind the community about Enhancements Freeze reminder send out. Example email: [1.26](https://groups.google.com/a/kubernetes.io/g/dev/c/pJZC2cnkeJ8); It may also be useful to send a short version to the `#sig-release` and `#chairs-and-techleads` Slack channels referencing to the k-dev email.
```

### 3. Enhancements freeze up to Release Halfway Point (~Week 5 - 7)

**General Tasks:**
- Bring exceptions to the #sig-release Slack channel and to Release Team meetings, and make sure SIG representatives for the exception(s) know to attend and discuss if necessary.
- Begin casual observation of issues, CI signal, test flakes, and critical PRs
<!-- - [ ] Continue reviewing enhancement exceptions as needed -->
- [ ] Release Team Retro is scheduled shortly after the "Release Halfway Point" and a host is selected
<!-- - [ ] The burndown templates should be useful at this point since it starts asking about status relevant to each area now tracking (e.g. branch health, docs, communications, issues, etc.) -->
<!-- - [ ] Most enhancement-oriented tasks should be completed at the end of this week -->
<!-- - [ ] SIGs that have not completed release themes should be contacted again, with a focus on explaining why this matters to the community -->

**Release Cut Alpha 3:**

> - [ ] Checked in with ci-signal and branch managers if x.y.0-alpha.3 is ok to be released and [master-blocking](https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-release-master-blocking) tests are all green

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] Checked in with ci-signal and branch managers if 1.XX.0-alpha.3 is ok to be released and [master-blocking](https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-release-master-blocking) tests are all green
```

> - [ ] Checked in with Release Notes team on release notes progress after the release notes for x.y.0-alpha.3 is generated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] Checked in with Release Notes team on release notes progress after the release notes for 1.XX.0-alpha.3 is generated
```

**Release Cut Alpha 4:**

> - [ ] Checked in with ci-signal and branch managers if x.y.0-alpha.4 is ok to be released and [master-blocking](https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-release-master-blocking) tests are all green

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] Checked in with ci-signal and branch managers if 1.XX.0-alpha.4 is ok to be released and [master-blocking](https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-release-master-blocking) tests are all green
```

> - [ ] Checked in with Release Notes team on release notes progress after the release notes for x.y.0-alpha.4 is generated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] Checked in with Release Notes team on release notes progress after the release notes for 1.XX.0-alpha.4 is generated
```

### 4. Release Halfway Point up to Code Freeze (~Week 8 - 11)

**General Tasks:**
- [ ] Send out a "Release Update / State of the Release", example: [1.26](https://groups.google.com/a/kubernetes.io/g/dev/c/_nToVaHVN1Q)
<!-- - [ ] Exception requests for Enhancements Freeze should be almost zero -->
- [ ] Notify SIGs and about upcoming Code Freeze Deadline by sending an email to the [kubernetes-dev](https://groups.google.com/a/kubernetes.io/g/dev) list
<!-- - [ ] Adjust the enhancements repo/tracking spreadsheet as necessary (this may also require modifying themes that can’t be delivered) -->

> - [ ] The first retrospective meeting is scheduled for the first week of M, W, F burndown meetings, typically mid-week. Confirm the Emeritus Adviser can serve as facilitator. If Emeritus Adviser is unavailable then defer the responsibility as appropriate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] The first retrospective meeting is scheduled for the first week of Monday, Wednesday, and Friday burndown meetings, typically mid-week. Confirm the Emeritus Adviser can serve as facilitator. If Emeritus Adviser is unavailable then defer the responsibility as appropriate.
```

- [ ] Make sure everyone knows the Docs deadline (PRs ready for review) is coming the following week.

> - [ ] Started release team meetings on Monday, Wednesday and Friday

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] Started release team meetings on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday
```

<!-- - [ ] Verify with SIGs if there are any planned deprecations or removals targeting the release -->
- [ ] A Release Team representative (ideally from release-comms) should attend the sig-docs meeting to raise awareness about the "Deprecations and Removals blog" for reviews.
- [ ] The Deprecations and Removals blog is scheduled for next week shortly after Code Freeze. A draft of the blog should be started as reviews and iterations will be needed before publication next week
- [ ] Insured that "Removals, Deprecations, and Major Changes"-authors are reviewing the blog before it's being publicized 

**Major Themes & Release Blog:**
- [ ] Followed up with SIGs on major themes of the release
- [ ] Checked in with release-notes and release-comms about the status of major themes collection

### 5. Around Code Freeze (~Week 13)
Defer to the [code freeze section](https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/tree/master/release-team/role-handbooks/release-team-lead#standards) in the release-team-lead handbook.

#### Shortly before Code freeze

> - Monitor the enhancements spreadsheet to get an idea of how many PRs are still outstanding leading up to Code Freeze

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Monitor the enhancements GitHub project to get an idea of how many PRs are still outstanding leading up to Code Freeze
```

- [ ] If the release branch is not healthy, stable, and passing tests consistently, notify community through standard channels of need to rectify or code freeze will come early to force focus on stabilization. -->
<!-- - [ ] Coordinate x.y.0-beta.0 release (~week 12, shortly after Code Freeze), ensuring master-blocking are 100% green if possible (this release is not an official beta, just an artifact of the release process), and any flakes are being actively worked by SIGs since this is a chance to look at CI signal. -->

#### With Code Freeze
- As needed, assist the Bug Triage Lead and Enhancements Lead removing PRs and enhancements from the milestone that aren't merged in time `/milestone clear`

#### After Code Freeze
- Wait for exception requests and bring them to `#sig-release`

> - [ ] Verified that the [`release-x.y` branch](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/branches) has been automatically created at the start of Test Freeze

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] Verified that the [`release-1.XX` branch](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/branches) has been automatically created at the start of Test Freeze
```

<!-- - [ ] The Release Team needs to look at any in-flight PRs and ensure nothing is being jammed in at the last minute without proper tests, review, etc. This is something to watch extremely closely because it happens every release. Just watch what gets merged closely after Code Freeze. Incorrectly merged items need assessed and perhaps reverted. GitHub has a query comparing a release branch and master. -->
<!-- - [ ] Assist the Documentation Leads in collecting missing docs PRs. -->
- [ ] Decided with the Release team if burndown meetings are necessary or updates are done via Slack thread on Tuesdays and Thursdays
<!-- - [ ] Release notes and themes should be close to done if not completed. There is a script that gathers notes from PRs but it’s still in progress. As the lead, you may need to help assemble the notes. -->
- [ ] Discussed Release Lead succession with the EA and sig-release leads
<!-- - [ ] Identify potential vacancies on the incoming Release Team and begin asking team shadows and former team shadows to serve as Lead in the upcoming cycle. Continue to improve and uphold the Release Team Selection process. -->

> - [ ] The task is now to ensure the release branch is ready to go. This means there are zero pending PRs, no failing x.y-blocking tests, no open issues in the milestone. This will continue until release day.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] The task is now to ensure the release branch is ready to go. This means there are zero pending PRs, no failing 1.XX-blocking tests, no open issues in the milestone. This will continue until release day.
```

<!-- - [ ] Work with the incoming Release Team Lead to establish incoming Release Team. -->
- [ ] Planned something for Release Day (Make the day as fun as you can for the team. Plan ahead for this and do something nice)
- [ ] Prepared [Release Team gifts](https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/tree/master/release-team/role-handbooks/release-team-lead#release-theme-gifts)
- [ ] The Release Team Retro part 2 and part 3 is scheduled shortly after the "Release Halfway Point" and a host / facilitator is available

### 7. Release Day (~Week 15)

- Note that release day can and should be postponed if any of the conditions outlined in week 11 are not satisfied.
- Every issue in the milestone is considered release blocking
- If you have to push the release date back, try to avoid Friday since it makes release publicity extremely difficult. Also, people seem to have patience with delay as long as the reasons are clear and openly communicated. This is your duty. You must over-communicate and ensure the team is also talking to their stakeholders (CNCF, community, press, etc.)
<!-- - [ ] Confirm a facilitator for the Release Retrospective -->

> - The following final actions **must occur in order**, with successful completion of each being the entry criteria to the next.

Reviewer: Maybe use a numbered list here if the order is critical?

Reviewer: Oh I see. Oh well.
